THE GRAPH RECONSTRUCTION CONJECTURE:
  SOME NEW RESULTS AND OBSERVATIONS


                                By



              AMITESH SAHA SHUVA

                   A Thesis submitted to the

                   School of Graduate Studies

    in partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for the degree of



                  MASTER OF SCIENCE


  DEPARTMENT OF COMPUTER SCIENCE


          Memorial University of Newfoundland



                        February, 2015




           St. John’s                    Newfoundland
                                ABSTRACT

A vertex-deleted subgraph (or simply a card) of graph G is an induced sub-
graph of G containing all but one of its vertices. The deck of G is the multiset
of its cards. One of the best-known unanswered questions of graph theory
asks whether G can be reconstructed in a unique way (up to isomorphism)
from its deck. The likely positive answer to this question is known as the
Reconstruction Conjecture.
     In the ﬁrst part of the thesis two basic equivalence relations are considered
on the set of vertices of the graph G to be reconstructed. The one is card
equivalence, better known as removal equivalence, by which two vertices are
equivalent if their removal results in isomorphic cards. The other equivalence
is similarity, also called automorphism equivalence. Two vertices u and v
are automorphism-equivalent (similar) if there exists an automorphism of G
taking u to v. These relations are analyzed on various examples with special
attention to vertices that are card-equivalent but not similar. Such vertices
are called pseudo-similar, and they have been studied very extensively in the
literature. The ﬁrst result of the thesis is a structural characterization of
card equivalence in terms of automorphism equivalence. A similar result was
obtained by Godsil and Kocay in 1982 on the characterization of pseudo-
similar vertices, which result is proved in the thesis as a corollary to the
characterization theorem on card equivalence.
     In the second part of the thesis, the concept of relative degree-sequence
is introduced for subgraphs of a graph G. By “relative” it is meant that each
degree in the degree-sequence of the subgraph is coupled up with the original
degree of the corresponding vertex in G. A new conjecture is formulated,
which says that G is uniquely determined (up to isomorphism) by the multiset
of the relative degree-sequences of its induced subgraphs. The new conjecture
is then related to the Reconstruction Conjecture in a natural way.
     The third part of the thesis contains an original new result on graph
reconstruction. Card-minimal graphs are investigated, the deck of which is
a set. Thus, the deck of such graphs is free from duplicate cards. It is shown
that every card-minimal graph G is reconstructible, provided that G does
not have pseudo-similar couples of vertices. This condition is recognizable,
that is, it can be checked by looking at the deck of G only.
     The results of this thesis have been partially published in [1].



                                        ii
                    ACKNOWLEDGMENTS




First and foremost, I oﬀer my sincerest gratitude to my supervisor, Dr.
Miklós Bartha, for his supervision, motivation, immense support and valu-
able suggestions throughout the research work. I attribute the level of my
Masters degree to his encouragement and eﬀort and without him this thesis,
would not have been completed. His guidance was source of inspiration for
me and I could not have imagined for a better and friendlier supervisor.



I would like to gratefully acknowledge my supervisor, the School of Grad-
uate Studies (SGS) and the Department of Computer Science, Memorial
University of Newfoundland for the ﬁnancial support throughout this Mas-
ters period.



At last I would like to express my gratitude to my parents and siblings for
their support and encouragement.




                                    iii
Contents

1 Introduction                                                               1
  1.1 Historical overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    1
  1.2 Basic terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    3

2 Definitions, and some easily recoverable data                            7
  2.1 Deﬁnitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
  2.2 A few known elementary results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

3 Card equivalence and pseudo-similarity                                 13
  3.1 Characterizing card equivalence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
  3.2 Mutually pseudo-similar sets of vertices . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23

4 Relative degree-sequences                                             28
  4.1 A few combinatorial observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
  4.2 The relative degree-sequence conjecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31

5 The reconstruction of card-minimal graphs                                35
  5.1 The role of pseudo-similar couples of vertices in card-minimal
      graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
  5.2 The reconstruction result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37

6 Conclusion                                                                39




                                     iv
List of Figures

 1.1   Pseudo-similar vertices. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    3

 2.1   Constructing the deck of a graph. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       8
 2.2   The smallest card-minimal graph. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        9

 3.1   The graph of Example 3.1.2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      14
 3.2   The graph of Example 3.1.3. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      15
 3.3   The graph H of Example 3.1.3. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        16
 3.4   The graph of Example 3.1.4. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      16
 3.5   The graph of Example 3.1.4 extended. . . . . . . . . . . . . .         17
 3.6   Extending graph G to H, a small example. . . . . . . . . . . .         22
 3.7   The graph H used as a meta-edge. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         25
 3.8   The triangle T3 built up from three H-edges. . . . . . . . . . .       25

 4.1   Graph G and its subgraph Q. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29

 5.1   Graphs with and without pseudo-similar couples of vertices. . 36
 5.2   The smallest card-minimal graph, revisited. . . . . . . . . . . 37




                                      v
Chapter 1

Introduction

1.1     Historical overview
The Reconstruction Conjecture is generally regarded as one of the foremost
unsolved problems in graph theory. Frank Harary [9] has even classiﬁed it
as a graphical disease because of its contagious nature. Some sources say
that the problem was discovered in Wisconsin in 1941 by Kelly and Ulam,
and claimed its ﬁrst victim (P. J. Kelly) in 1942. Indeed, Kelly’s doctoral
dissertation [13], which he wrote under the supervision of Ulam, appeared in
that year. Later, in 1957, Kelly published the ﬁrst relevant result on graph
reconstruction, showing that trees are reconstructible [14].
   Others say that Stanislaw Ulam knew about the ideas that later became
the Reconstruction Conjecture as early as 1929 when, along with Stanislaw
Mazur, Stefan Banach, Kazimierz Kuratowski, and others, he was a member
of the Lwów School of Mathematics in Poland. (Today Lviv, Ukraine, also
known as Lemberg, Galicia, Austria-Hungary.) Ulam had spent many years
collecting problems that were posed by fellow graduate students and profes-
sors during his years in graduate school in Lwów. These problems have been
recorded in the famous Scottish Book, which was a thick notebook used by
mathematicians of the Lwów School of Mathematics for jotting down prob-
lems meant to be solved. The notebook was named after the ”Scottish Café”


                                     1
in Lwów where it was kept. Ulam himself contributed 40 problems as a sin-
gle author to the Scottish Book, another 11 with Banach and Mazur, and an
additional 15 with others.
    Even though the Reconstruction Conjecture cannot be found in the Scot-
tish Book, it does appear in the ﬁrst part of a monograph written by Ulam
in 1960 under the title “A Collection of Mathematical Problems” [27], and
Ulam does say in the preface:

     In spirit, the questions considered in the ﬁrst part of this collec-
     tion belong to a complex of problems represented in the Scottish
     Book.. . . Many of the problems contained here were indeed ﬁrst
     inscribed in the Scottish Book, but the greater part of the mate-
     rial is of later origin . . . Many of the problems originated through
     conversations with others and were stimulated by the transistory
     interests of the moment in various mathematical centers.

   The uncertainties above have created a diﬃculty in trying to determine
who should have credit for creating this beautiful problem in graph theory.
The commonly accepted solution to this dispute is to call the problem the
Kelly-Ulam conjecture. The conjecture itself, as speciﬁed below, was given
the name “an inductive lemma in combinatorial analysis” by Ulam. The
reader should keep in mind that this version of the conjecture is presented
here for purely historical reasons; we will never actually use the original
metric terminology by Ulam.
Ulam’s Statement of the Reconstruction Conjecture [27]

     Suppose that in two sets A and B, each containing n elements,
     there is deﬁned a distance function ρ for every pair of distinct
     points, with values either 1 or 2, and ρ(p, p) = 0. Assume that
     for every subset of n − 1 points of A, there exists an isometric
     system of n − 1 points of B, and that the number of distinct


                                      2
                      v              u


                    Figure 1.1: Pseudo-similar vertices.

      subsets isometric to any given subset of n − 1 points is the same
      in A and in B. Are A and B isometric?

   Interestingly, the problem of graph reconstruction has yet another impor-
tant historical aspect, which is related to the concept of pseudo-similarity.
According to the survey [20] by Josef Lauri, graph theorists seem to have
stumbled on this concept quite by accident. If two vertices u and v in a
graph G are similar, that is, there is an automorphism of G which maps
one into the other, then it is clear G − u and G − v are isomorphic graphs.
However, the converse is not true, because G − u and G − v can be iso-
morphic without u and v being similar in G. The smallest graph for which
this can happen is shown in Fig. 1.1. Nobody seems to have given this phe-
nomenon any thought until (as reported by Harary and Palmer [11]) someone
apparently found a proof of the celebrated Reconstruction Conjecture which
depended on the assumption that if G − u and G − v are isomorphic, then
u and v must be similar. To Harary and Palmer goes the credit of taking
what could simply have remained a curious counter-example, and turning it
into a graph theoretic concept worthy of investigation. Their 1965 and 1966
papers proved the ﬁrst results and set the scene for further studies.


1.2     Basic terminology
In this section we present the collection of basic deﬁnitions in graph theory
that will be used throughout the thesis. Additional terminology speciﬁcally

                                     3
related to the problem of graph reconstruction will follow in later chapters.
    An undirected graph (or simply a graph) G consists of a ﬁnite non-empty
set V (G) of vertices and a set of unordered pairs E(G) of edges. Notice that,
by this deﬁnition, multiple edges are not allowed to occur in G. Indeed, E(G)
is not a multiset. By an unordered pair of vertices we in fact mean a couple
{u, v} ⊆ V (G), even though we shall simply write (u, v) ∈ E(G). Loops (i.e.,
edges connecting vertices with themselves) are therefore excluded from E(G)
as well. An edge (u, v) is said to connect the vertices u and v, to be incident
with these two vertices, and vertices u and v are said to be adjacent.
    Even though it is not consistent with the above deﬁnition of graphs,
in some situations it is inevitable to accept the “empty graph” also as a
graph. This abstraction has no vertices and no edges, so that it is indeed
completely empty. Its presence is useful in some graph operations, e.g., in
taking the disjoint union of graphs. The relevance of the empty graph is that
it becomes a unit element for this operation, rendering the corresponding
algebraic structure on graphs a classical (commutative) monoid.
    Let G and H be graphs. A one-to-one correspondence φ mapping V (G)
onto V (H) is called an isomorphism if for every pair u, v of vertices in V (G),
(u, v) ∈ E(G) iﬀ (φ(u), φ(v)) ∈ E(H). If such an isomorphism exists, then
the graphs G and H are said to be isomorphic, in notation G ∼        = H. An
isomorphism of graph G onto itself is called an automorphism of G.
   The number of edges in graph G incident with a concrete vertex v is called
the degree of v and denoted by dG (v) (d(v), if G is understood). The degree-
sequence of G is the sequence of degrees of G’s vertices in a non-decreasing
order. A graph in which all degrees are equal to k is said to be k-regular,
and if G is k-regular for some k, we simply say that G is regular. A complete
graph is one in which every two distinct vertices are connected by an edge.
   An alternating sequence of vertices and edges, beginning and ending with
vertices such that each edge in the sequence is incident with the vertex im-
mediately preceding it and with the one immediately following it, is called a


                                       4
walk. If all edges in a walk are distinct, then the walk is a trail, and if, in
addition, the vertices are also distinct, then the trail is a path. The length of
a walk is the number of occurrences of edges in it. A walk or trail in which
the ﬁrst vertex coincides with the last one is called closed. A cycle is a closed
trail of length at least three that consists of a path together with an edge
connecting the ﬁrst and last vertices of the path. A graph not containing
cycles is called a tree.
   If G and H are graphs such that V (H) ⊆ V (G) and E(H) ⊆ E(G),
then H is called a subgraph of G. If H is a subgraph of G and if every edge
(u, v) ∈ E(G) is also in E(H), provided that its endpoints u and v are in
V (H), then we call H an induced subgraph of G. If Y ⊆ V (G), then G[Y ],
the subgraph of G induced by Y , is the induced subgraph of G having Y
as its vertices. With some ambiguity, for X ⊆ V (G) we shall simply write
G − X to denote the induced subgraph G[V (G) \ X]. Sometimes we even
write G − x or G − x − y to mean G − {x} or G − {x, y} if x and y are
individual vertices of G.
   A graph is connected if every two vertices are joined by a path. A maximal
connected subgraph of G is called a component of G. A disconnected graph
is one that has more than one components.
    If the edges of a graph have a direction assigned to them, then we speak
of a directed graph. More precisely, a directed graph, or digraph for short, G
consists of a set V (G) of vertices and a set E(G) of ordered pairs of vertices,
called edges. The deﬁnition of walk, trail, path, and cycle must be modiﬁed
somewhat in digraphs, saying that each edge e = (u, v) in these constructs
(as alternating sequences of vertices and edges) connects the vertex u before
e to the vertex v after e. An acyclic digraph is one containing no directed
cycles. A digraph is strongly connected if for every ordered pair (u, v) of
vertices there is a (directed) path joining u to v.
   A tournament is a digraph obtained by assigning a direction for each
edge in an undirected complete graph. In other words, a tournament is an


                                       5
orientation of a complete graph, or equivalently, a directed graph in which
every pair of distinct vertices is connected by a single directed edge. A
tournament T is called transitive if (u, v) ∈ E(T ) and (v, w) ∈ E(T ) imply
(u, w) ∈ E(T ) for all distinct vertices u, v, w. If (u, v) ∈ E(T ), then we also
say that vertex u dominates vertex v in T .
   At the end of Chapter 4 we shall also need to use some basic linear al-
gebraic terminology to address the connection between the Reconstruction
Conjecture and our new conjecture on sets of relative degree-sequences. Since
the introduction of this terminology would take us too far in this short in-
troduction, we just refer the reader to any standard text in linear algebra for
the concepts involved in those arguments.




                                       6
Chapter 2

Definitions, and some easily
recoverable data

In this chapter we review the most important deﬁnitions relating to the
problem of graph reconstruction, and provide a brief summary of some of
the best-known elementary results.


2.1     Definitions
Definition 2.1.1 For a graph G and vertex v ∈ V (G), G − v is called a
vertex-deleted subgraph of G, or the card associated with vertex v in G. We
do not distinguish between isomorphic cards, though. The multiset of cards
collected from G in this way is called the deck of G, denoted D(G).

See Fig 2.1 for the deck of a small graph G.
   In the language of modern graph theory, the Reconstruction Conjecture,
introduced in Section 1.1 as the Kelly-Ulam conjecture, states that an arbi-
trary graph G having at least three vertices can be reconstructed in a unique
way (up to isomorphism) from its deck.
    Ever since its inception, this problem has remained a mystery. Trying to
solve it is similar to conducting a criminal investigation. There is a suspect,
the graph G, who leaves plenty of evidence (i.e., the deck D(G)) on the crime

                                      7
               Figure 2.1: Constructing the deck of a graph.

scene. Yet, no brilliant detective has been able to track down the suspect
for over 70 years, and the number of works on the case is rapidly decreasing
year by year. The reconstruction problem was, however, very popular in the
past. According to [25], more than 300 research papers had been published
on graph reconstruction between 1950 and 2004.

Definition 2.1.2 Two vertices u, v ∈ V (G) are called hypomorphic or card-
equivalent (c-equivalent, for short) if the card associated with u is identical
to the one associated with v, i.e., G − u ∼ = G − v. (Remember that we do
not distinguish between isomorphic cards.)

Yet another name for card equivalence is removal equivalence, which is often
used in the literature. Card equivalence will be denoted by ∼c . Clearly, ∼c
is indeed an equivalence relation on V (G).

Definition 2.1.3 Two graphs G and H are hypomorphic if D(G) and D(H)
are identical as multisets, that is, each card appears in D(G) and D(H) the

                                      8
               Figure 2.2: The smallest card-minimal graph.

same number of times. (Recall that D(G) denotes the deck of G.) If G
and H are hypomorphic, then a hypomorphism of G onto H is a bijection
φ : V (G) → V (H) such that G − v ∼
                                  = H − φ(v) holds for every v ∈ V (G).

A reconstruction of G is a graph G′ such that G and G′ are hypomorphic, or,
equivalently, there exists a hypomorphism of G onto G′ . Using this terminol-
ogy, the Reconstruction Conjecture simply says that two graphs G and H are
hypomorphic iﬀ they are isomorphic. In other words, all reconstructions of
G are isomorphic (to G, of course). Clearly, every isomorphism of G onto H
is a hypomorphism, but the converse is not true, even if the Reconstruction
Conjecture holds. Indeed, the Reconstruction Conjecture only says that if
there is a hypomorphism between G and H, then there is one which is also
an isomorphism.

Definition 2.1.4 Graph G is called card-minimal if D(G) is a set, that is,
each card is unique in D(G).

Our aim in this thesis is to show that the Reconstruction Conjecture holds
true for a large subclass of card-minimal graphs. Notice that both graphs
on two vertices have two identical cards, therefore every card-minimal graph
has at least three vertices. In fact it is easy to see by trying out all graphs
on ﬁve or less vertices that the smallest card-minimal graph has six vertices.
See Fig. 2.2.
    One might think that card-minimal graphs are trivially reconstructible,
since there is a unique hypomorphism between any two hypomorphic card-

                                      9
minimal graphs G and H. While this is certainly true, we have no direct
information on E(G) and E(H), therefore the given unique hypomorphism
may not be an isomorphism. Reconstructing G from D(G) is still a very com-
plex issue for such graphs. As we shall see, any duplication of cards in D(G)
indicates a kind of symmetry in the internal structure of G. Consequently,
the class of card-minimal graphs is really large. Our result is therefore in
accordance with the observation in [3] saying that the probability that a ran-
domly chosen graph on n vertices is not reconstructible goes to 0 as n goes
to inﬁnity.

Definition 2.1.5 A function deﬁned on a class G of graphs is reconstructible
if, for each graph G in G, it takes the same value on all reconstructions of G.

Definition 2.1.6 A class (or property) G of graphs is recognizable if, for
each G-graph G, every reconstruction of G is also in G.

Deﬁnition 2.1.6 essentially says that a property of graphs is recognizable if
its presence is already indicated by the deck of such graphs. For example,
as we shall immediately see, the degree-sequence of graphs is a recognizable
property. To spell it out, the class of graphs having the same concrete degree-
sequence (as a property) is recognizable. By the same token, according to
Deﬁnition 2.1.5, the degree-sequence is a reconstructible function of (gen-
eral) graphs. Deﬁnitions 2.1.5 and 2.1.6 are therefore somewhat ambiguous,
and the words “reconstructible” and “recognizable” can be interchanged, de-
pending on the context (namely, the class G of graphs in hand). To add even
more to the confusion, we shall sometimes say that a property or some data
obtained about graph G is recoverable if it can be recovered from D(G).


2.2      A few known elementary results
In general, it is trivial that |V (G)|, the number of vertices of G, is recoverable
from D(G). It is still easy to see that |E(G)| is also recoverable. Indeed, add

                                        10
up the numbers of edges appearing on the cards of D(G), and observe that
this sum is equal to
                            (|V (G)| − 2) · |E(G)|.
See [23, Theorem 2.1] for the details of this simple combinatorial argument.
   Once |E(G)| is given, calculating the degree d(v) of vertex v for card
G − v is straightforward:

                         d(v) = |E(G)| − |E(G − v)|.

Clearly, the degree of any vertex c-equivalent with v is the same as that of
v. We thus have managed to recover the degree-sequence of G from D(G).
(Recall that the degree-sequence of G is the sequence of degrees of G’s vertices
in a non-decreasing order.)
    A similar combinatorial argument leads to the following result, known as
Kelly’s Lemma [14], see also [23, Theorem 2.4].

Proposition 2.2.1 For any graph Q, let sQ (G) denote the number of sub-
graphs of G isomorphic to Q. Then sQ (G) = sQ (H) whenever G and H are
hypomorphic and |V (Q)| < |V (G)|.

Proof. There exists a hypomorphism φ of G onto H. Since each subgraph of
G isomorphic to Q is contained in |V (G)| − |V (Q)| vertex-deleted subgraphs
of G, and a similar remark applies to H, and since G − v ∼   = H − φ(v) for
every v ∈ V (G), it follows that
                                    X
  sQ (G) · (|V (G)| − |V (Q)|) =             sQ (G − v)
                                   v∈V (G)
                                    X                           X
                               =             sQ (H − φ(v)) =             sQ (H − w)
                                   v∈V (G)                     w∈V (H)

                               = sQ (H) · (|V (H) − |V (Q)|),

from which we infer that sQ (G) = sQ (H), since |V (Q)| < |V (G)| = |V (H)|.
                                                                               
   The following result is also due to Kelly [14].

                                       11
Theorem 2.2.2 Regular graphs are reconstructible.

Proof. Let G be a k-regular graph. Since the degree-sequence is recognizable
(reconstructible/recoverable), all reconstructions of G are k-regular. Also, all
k-regular reconstructions of G are isomorphic, because each can be obtained,
up to isomorphism, from an arbitrary card G − v by adding a vertex and
connecting it to every vertex of degree k − 1 in G − v.      
   Kelly [14] also applied his lemma (Proposition 2.2.1 above) to show that
disconnected graphs and trees are reconstructible. The reader is referred to
either of the surveys [4] or [23] for a proof of these results.
    Nash-Williams [23] has shown that the so-called degree-sequence sequence
of G is recoverable from D(G). Essentially this means that, not only d(v) can
be read from the card G − v as above, but also the degrees of the neighbors
of v are recoverable in this way. We shall reformulate Nash-Williams’ proof
in Chapter 4 in terms of relative degree-sequences. A natural question to ask
at this point is whether the degrees of the neighbors of the neighbors of v are
also recoverable, and so on, moving away further and further from vertex v.
This question is already a lot more diﬃcult to answer, mainly because the
desired degrees and degree-sequences are no longer c-equivalence invariant.
In other words, the answer depends on the representant vertex v chosen for
the card G − v. For card-minimal graphs, however, these data should be
recoverable, even though probably very diﬃcult to obtain.
   One of the last true champions of graph reconstruction was F. Harary.
He suggested a natural analogue [8] of the Reconstruction Conjecture, which
says that every graph having at least four vertices is uniquely reconstructible
from the deck of its edge-deleted subgraphs. Others have come up with
similar conjectures for directed graphs, cf. [24, 26], and have obtained partial
results proving or disproving them. See again [23] and [4] for more details.




                                      12
Chapter 3

Card equivalence and
pseudo-similarity

3.1     Characterizing card equivalence
The simple results discussed so far are of a strictly combinatorial nature, and
they do not even touch on the structural properties of card equivalence. In
this section we present a real structural characterization of this equivalence
relation, which is our ﬁrst main result. In this characterization, card equiv-
alence is compared with another important equivalence relation on V(G),
namely automorphism equivalence.

Definition 3.1.1 Two vertices u, v ∈ V (G) are automorphism-equivalent
(a-equivalent, for short) if there exists an automorphism of G taking u to v.
The (vertex-)orbits of G are the equivalence classes of V (G) by automorphism
equivalence.

Automorphism equivalence will be denoted by ∼a . In the literature, two
automorphism-equivalent vertices are usually called similar. It is obvious
that ∼a is an equivalence relation, but its relationship to ∼c is not clear for
the ﬁrst sight. Remember that ∼c denotes card-equivalence.




                                      13
                         u1             u2              u3



                   Figure 3.1: The graph of Example 3.1.2.

Example 3.1.2 Let G be the graph in Fig. 3.1, and consider the vertices
u1 , u2 , u3 in G. It is easy to see that ui ∼c uj and ui ∼a uj both hold for any
1 ≤ i, j ≤ 3.

In general, it is clear by the deﬁnitions that ∼a ⊆∼c . Example 3.1.3 below
shows, however, that ∼c 6⊆∼a .

Example 3.1.3 Let G be the graph of Fig. 3.2, and consider again the
vertices u1 , u2 , u3 . As it turns out, u1 ∼c u3 , but u1 6∼a u3 . Furthermore, G
has no automorphisms other than the identity.

Vertices that are c-equivalent but not a-equivalent are called pseudo-similar
in the literature. See [20] for an extensive survey on pseudo-similarity. Ver-
tices u1 and u3 in the graph G of Fig. 3.2 are typical pseudo-similar ones.
The graph G itself arises from deleting a leaf vertex u4 from an appropriate
graph H — shown in Fig. 3.3 — in which u4 is the “natural continuation”
of the sequence of vertices u1 , u2 , u3 . The graph H has a non-trivial auto-
morphism θ, which extends an appropriate automorphism ψ of the “kernel”
subgraph G − {u1 , u2 , u3 } in such a way that the vertices ui , 1 ≤ i ≤ 4, are
mapped by θ into each other in the cyclic order

                               ui 7→ u(i (mod 4))+1 .

                                        14
                    u1            u2            u3



                   Figure 3.2: The graph of Example 3.1.3.

The vertices u1 and u3 must of course be at the two ends of the “tail” sequence
u1 , u2 , u3 of G in order to maintain card equivalence.
     The following example is somewhat diﬀerent, yet it illustrates the same
kernel-tail decomposition idea with the kernel subgraph being disconnected.


Example 3.1.4 Consider the graph G of Fig. 3.4. Clearly, the vertices u1
and u2 are pseudo-similar. At the ﬁrst glance it appears that one cannot ex-
tend G to a graph H having an automorphism that builds on an appropriate
automorphism of the kernel G − {u1 , u2 } in such a way that u1 is mapped to
u2 . A look at Fig. 3.5, however, shows immediately that this is possible, and
the solution follows the exact same pattern as in Example 3.1.3.

   The above examples show that the equivalence ∼c is rather inconvenient
to deal with in a direct way. We need to ﬁnd a characterization of ∼c that
brings it in line with the much better structured equivalence ∼a . The basis
of this characterization is the following lemma.

Lemma 3.1.5 Let u and v be two distinct vertices of G. Then u ∼c v iff
there exists a sequence of vertices x0 , x1 , . . . , xk (k ≥ 1) in G satisfying the
conditions (i) and (ii) below.

                                        15
 u1           u2         u3          u4



Figure 3.3: The graph H of Example 3.1.3.




         u1                   u2




 Figure 3.4: The graph of Example 3.1.4.




                   16
  u1                 u2    u3   u4    u5   u6




Figure 3.5: The graph of Example 3.1.4 extended.




                      17
  (i) x0 = v and xk = u;

 (ii) there exists an isomorphism φ of G−u onto G−v such that φ(xi ) = xi+1
      for every 0 ≤ i < k.

Proof. Notice ﬁrst that the graphs G − u and G − v are not separated in the
lemma, they both use the vertices of the common supergraph G. The lemma
therefore establishes a link between two c-equivalent vertices u and v in G
through a sequence of (necessarily distinct) vertices x1 , . . . , xn−1 in G − u − v.
These vertices, however, need not be c-equivalent with u or each other in G.
For example, in the graph of Fig. 3.2, if v = u1 and u = u3 , then k = 2,
x1 = u2 , and φ can be derived from the automorphism of G − {u1 , u2 , u3 }
that determines a cyclic permutation of the four small cycles of G from left
to right. Clearly, u1 6∼c u2 .
    Suﬃciency of condition (ii) alone for having u ∼c v is trivial. Assuming
that u ∼c v, choose an arbitrary isomorphism φ : G − u → G − v. Let
x1 = φ(v), x2 = φ(x1 ), and so on, until u = xk = φ(xk−1 ) is reached.
Vertex u must indeed be encountered at some point along this line, since φ,
being an isomorphism, is an injective mapping V (G) \ {u} → V (G) \ {v}.
Consequently, the vertices x1 , . . . , xk−1 in V (G) \ {u, v} will all be diﬀerent
until xk = u stops this necessarily ﬁnite sequence. Mind that xi+1 = φ(xi ) 6=
v, since v is not a vertex of G − v. Therefore the sequence x0 , . . . , xk cannot
return to itself. The proof is complete.        

Theorem 3.1.6 Let u and v be two distinct vertices of G. Then u ∼c v iff
there exists a sequence of pairwise distinct vertices x0 , x1 , . . . , xk (k ≥ 1) and
an automorphism ψ of the subgraph G − {x0 , x1 , . . . , xk } which satisfy the
following three conditions.

  (i) x0 = v and xk = u;

 (ii) if X = {x0 , x1 , . . . , xk }, then for every 0 ≤ i < k and vertex wi ∈
      V (G) \ X adjacent to xi in G (or, equivalently, in G − u), the vertex

                                         18
      wi+1 = ψ(wi ) is adjacent to xi+1 in G (i.e., in G − v);

(iii) for every 0 ≤ i < j < k,

                   xi is adjacent to xj iff xi+1 is adjacent to xj+1

      (in G, of course).

Vertices u and v are a-equivalent iff the sequence of vertices x0 , . . . , xk and the
automorphism ψ can be chosen in such a way that the assignments xi 7→ xi+1 ,
u 7→ v extend ψ to an automorphism of G.

Proof. Intuitively, condition (ii) says that for every 0 ≤ i < k, the neighbors
of xi in G − X are matched up with those of xi+1 in G − X by the automor-
phism ψ. Condition (iii) settles the issue of how the vertices xi themselves
are connected in G. Clearly, the question whether u is connected to v is
irrelevant.
    The ﬁrst statement of the theorem, regarding the existence of X and
ψ, is in fact a simple consequence of Lemma 3.1.5. Concerning suﬃciency,
if ψ is an automorphism of G − X satisfying (ii), then by (i) and (iii) it
can be extended to an isomorphism φ of G − u onto G − v satisfying (ii)
of Lemma 3.1.5. Thus, u ∼c v. Conversely, if u ∼c v, then the required
automorphism ψ can be chosen as the restriction of the isomorphism φ –
guaranteed by Lemma 3.1.5 – to G − X. Notice that the subgraph G − X
may turn out to be empty.
    As to the second statement of the theorem (regarding the a-equivalence
of u and v), if the given extension of ψ becomes an automorphism of G, then
clearly u ∼a v. On the other hand, if χ is an automorphism of G taking u to
v, then the restriction of χ to the vertices V (G)−{u} deﬁnes an isomorphism
φ of G − u onto G − v. Apply Lemma 3.1.5 to obtain the vertices X from
φ, and construct the automorphism ψ of G − X by restricting φ to that
subgraph. Clearly, the assignments xi 7→ xi+1 and u 7→ v, when extending
ψ, will simply reconstruct the original automorphism χ.   
                                         19
   At this point the reader may want to have a second look at Examples 3.1.2
and 3.1.3, and identify the underlying automorphism ψ in the graphs of
Fig. 3.1 and Fig. 3.2. One important point is that, given the fact v ∼a u
(and therefore u ∼c v), one must not jump to the conclusion that x0 = v
and x1 = u will do for X = {x0 , x1 } in Theorem 3.1.6, and then be taken
by surprise that the desired automorphism ψ cannot be located in G − X.
For example, in the graph G of Fig. 3.1, if v = u1 and u = u2 , then x1 = u3 !
Consequently, X = {u1 , u2 , u3 }, and the automorphism ψ is just the one
taking the three small cycles into one another following a cyclic permutation
with oﬀset 2 from left to right.
   The pair (s, ψ), where s is the sequence (x0 , . . . xk ) constructed in
Lemma 3.1.5 and ψ is the automorphism of the graph G − X according
to Theorem 3.1.6, is called a kernel-tail decomposition of G with respect to
the c-equivalent pair of vertices (u, v). The sequence s is the tail and the
subgraph G − X is the kernel of this decomposition. Clearly, the decompo-
sition is not unique regarding the sequence s. Moreover, even with s being
ﬁxed, the corresponding automorphism ψ of the kernel G − X may not be
uniquely determined.
   Following [20], for the rest of this chapter we shall concentrate on the
concept of pseudo-similarity in graphs. The most general construction from
which all pairs of pseudo-similar vertices can be obtained was found by Godsil
and Kocay [7], who showed that such pairs can in fact always be captured
by destroying some circular symmetry in a larger graph. We have already
elaborated on this idea to some extent in Examples 3.1.3 and 3.1.4. Below
we give a proof of [7, Theorem 2.2] as a corollary to our Theorem 3.1.6. The
reader is advised to follow the main steps of the proof on Figures 3.3 and 3.4.

Corollary 3.1.7 ([7]) Let G be a graph with pseudo-similar vertices u and
v. Then there is a graph H with the following properties:

  (i) G is an induced subgraph of H.


                                      20
 (ii) There exists an automorphism θ of H which maps G − u onto G − v in
      such a way that u = θk (v) for some k ≥ 1.

(iii) V (H) \ V (G) = {y1 , . . . , yr }, where yi = θk+i (v) and θ(yr ) = v.
Proof. By Theorem 3.1.6, G has a kernel-tail decomposition (s, ψ) with
respect to (u, v), where s = (x0 , . . . , xk ), k ≥ 1 is the tail with v = x0
and u = xk , and ψ is an appropriate automorphism of the kernel G − X
(X = {x0 , . . . , xk }). Let M denote the set of neighbors of v belonging to the
kernel. Even though it is an aside at this point, observe that M cannot be
empty. Indeed, if M = ∅, then Theorem 3.1.6 (iii) would imply that that the
vertices xi and xk−i are exchange-equivalent for each 0 ≤ i ≤ k, contradicting
the fact that x0 = v and xk = u are pseudo-similar. For the same reason, it
cannot happen either that M is a singleton and ψ(M ) = M . Nevertheless,
the construction we are going to present will extend G to an appropriate H
in these two special cases as well. As we shall see, the chiral symmetry of
the vertices xi will simply be turned into a circular one by adding an extra
vertex xk+1 .
   Consider the sets of vertices M, ψ(M ), ψ 2 (M ), . . . , where by deﬁnition,
ψ(M ) = {ψ(w)|w ∈ M }. By Theorem 3.1.6 (ii) we know that these sets of
vertices, up to power k, are exactly the kernel-neighbors of x0 , . . . , xk . Since
G − X is ﬁnite and ψ is an automorphism, there exists a smallest integer
j ≥ 1 such that ψ j (M ) = M and the sets ψ i (M ), 1 ≤ i ≤ j are pairwise
distinct. Consequently, there exists a smallest l > k such that ψ l+1 (M ) = M .
Notice that the choice l > k is crucial. Choosing l = k – if at all possible –
would allow G to be extended to a seemingly appropriate graph H by adding
edges connecting some of x0 , . . . , xk only, and so missing the requirement
that G be an induced subgraph of the extension. For example, in the graph
of Fig. 3.1, connect u1 with u2 and u2 with u3 to obtain graph G. Then u1
and u3 are no longer a-equivalent, but they are still pseudo-similar. If v = u1
and u = u3 , then the number j in the argument above is clearly 3. Simply
connecting u3 with u1 by a new edge in this situation would result in a graph

                                         21
              v=x 1                   u=x 2                            x3

           Figure 3.6: Extending graph G to H, a small example.


H satisfying the requirements of the theorem, except for the condition that
G be an induced subgraph of H.
   Let r = l − k, and adjoin to V (G) r new vertices y1 , . . . , yr . For each
1 ≤ i ≤ r, install a new edge from yi to each vertex of ψ k+i (M ). See Fig. 3.5.
Finally, by letting xk+1 = y1 , . . . xk+r = yr in the sequence of vertices

                          x0 , x1 , . . . , xk , xk+1 , . . . xk+r ,

add new edges between xi and xj recursively to the minimum extent in order
to maintain the condition (iii) of Theorem 3.1.6 in a circular fashion. That
is, the condition:

      xi is adjacent to xj iﬀ xi+1 (mod (k+r)) is adjacent to xj+1 (mod (k+r))

must hold for each 0 ≤ i < j ≤ k + r. The details of this recursive procedure
are straightforward, and left to the reader. See Fig. 3.6 for a small example.

   The resulting graph after the above extensions is H. It is obvious that G is
a proper induced subgraph of H, and H satisﬁes the conditions (i) and (ii) of
the corollary with the extension θ of ψ by which the vertices x0 , x1 , . . . , xk+r
are mapped to each other in the way:

                xi 7→ xi+1 (mod (k+r)) , 1 ≤ i ≤ k + r.                     
                                             22
   A reader familiar with the original proof of [7, Theorem 2.2] by Godsil
and Kocay will notice that their proof (for a ﬁnite graph G) is essentially the
combination of our Theorem 3.1.6 and Corollary 3.1.7, just as we presented
them above. For this reason, Theorem 3.1.6 cannot be considered a com-
pletely new contribution. There is, however, a major diﬀerence in the nature
of these two results. While our Theorem 3.1.6 is primarily a decomposition
tool, [7, Theorem 2.2] tends to blow up the graph, sometimes quite signiﬁ-
cantly. Refer to Fig. 3.5 for an evidence of this fact. The importance of the
kernel-tail decomposition lies in the fact that it could be used as a lemma in
inductive reasonings about the structure of symmetries in G.
   One disturbing observation arising from Theorem 3.1.6 is that it does not
reﬂect the transitivity of card equivalence. Indeed, if (s, ψ) and (t, χ) are
kernel-tail decompositions of G with respect to c-equivalent pairs (u, v) and
(v, w), respectively, then the theorem provides no clue for ﬁnding a kernel-
tail decomposition with respect to (u, w). Working out such a method will
be the subject of a future study.


3.2      Mutually pseudo-similar sets of vertices
According to [20], the most interesting open questions on pseudo-similarity
are related to the issue of ﬁnding large sets of mutually pseudo-similar vertices
in graphs. Lauri does not explain in his survey why one must say “mutually
pseudo-similar” in this context. The reason is that pseudo-similarity by itself
is not an equivalence relation on V (G) as one might suspect, and it is not true
that card equivalence is simply the union of automorphism equivalence and
pseudo-similarity. Mutually pseudo-similar therefore means pairwise pseudo-
similar in standard mathematical terms.
   The problem of ﬁnding graphs with more than two mutually pseudo-
similar vertices has been investigated by a number of authors [6, 15, 16, 17,
18, 19, 21, 22]. Among these, the construction of [16] is particularly simple


                                       23
to describe in terms of our kernel-tail decomposition. The basic idea of the
construction is the observation that coming up with a number of mutually
pseudo-similar vertices is much easier in directed graphs. Notice that the
concept of card equivalence and that of of pseudo-similarity is meaningful in
directed graphs, literally by the original deﬁnition of these concepts.
   The transitive tournament Tk on k vertices {1, . . . k}, in which vertex
i dominates vertex j iﬀ i < j, is a perfect example of a directed graph
having all of its vertices mutually pseudo-symmetric. The problem of ﬁnding
an undirected graph with k mutually pseudo-symmetric vertices therefore
reduces to transforming (i.e., blowing up) Tk into an undirected graph while
preserving the pseudo-similarity of the old vertices {1, . . . , k}. We shall work
out the solution for the simplest case k = 3 below.
   Take an arbitrary graph H with two pseudo-similar vertices u, v, so that
H has a kernel-tail decomposition (s, ψ) with s = (v, u). The graph H with
its distinguished ordered pair (v, u) of vertices can be considered as a directed
(meta-)edge in any graph, connecting two (not necessarily distinct) vertices x
and y, so that the source x of the meta-edge is identiﬁed with v and the target
y is identiﬁed with u. If x = y, then vertices u and v will be joined in H,
which might lead to a multigraph. The exact mathematical formalism that
corresponds to this technique is the general operation of graph composition
described e.g. in [2, 5]. For our present purposes, however, the heuristic idea
of creating a meta-edge from H is completely adequate.
    Take, for example, the graph of Fig. 3.7 as H, and assemble the transitive
triangle T3 from three “H-edges” as shown in Fig. 3.8. The “direction” of
each edge in the resulting graph G is v → u. It is now obvious that the
vertices x, y, z corresponding to the three vertices of T3 are pseudo-similar.
As proved in [16], this technique works for an arbitrary k ≥ 3. One could
as well use Theorem 3.1.6 to provide an independent proof of this fact. It is
essential, however, that the tail s of the decomposition (s, q) of H has length
two, otherwise the construction does not work.


                                       24
                  v           u

        Figure 3.7: The graph H used as a meta-edge.




                              u
                          u   z




v                                                  v
        x                                      y
    v                                              u




Figure 3.8: The triangle T3 built up from three H-edges.




                              25
   As a generalization of Corollary 3.1.7, Kocay [17] has obtained the fol-
lowing result on mutually pseudo-similar vertices.

Theorem 3.2.1 ([17]) Let G be a graph with a set U = {u0 , u1 , . . . uk−1 } of
k mutually pseudo-similar vertices. Let φi : G−ui → G−u0 be isomorphisms
for 1 ≤ i ≤ k − 1. Then G can be extended to a graph H, and each φi to an
endomorphism θi of H such that:

  (i) G is an induced subgraph of H;

 (ii) the vertices of U , together with those in V (H) \ V (G), are in the same
      orbit in H.

Theorem 3.2.1 is an analogue of Corollary 3.1.7 with one important diﬀerence:
the graph H in Theorem 3.2.1 is infinite, even when G is ﬁnite. The full
analogue of Corollary 3.1.7, as well as that of our Theorem 3.1.6 regarding
the kernel-tail decomposition of a graph relative to a complete c-equivalence
class of vertices is still unknown.
    We end this section by a deﬁnition that will be used in Chapter 5. A
2-vertex-deleted subgraph of a graph G having at least three vertices is an
induced subgraph of G containing all but two of its vertices. On the analogy
of cards, a 2-vertex-deleted subgraph of G is called a 2-card, and the multi-
set of G’s 2-cards is called the 2-deck of G. As in the case of cards, we do
not distinguish between isomorphic 2-cards. Clearly, the 2-deck of G is com-
putable from D(G). Indeed, one must include each vertex-deleted subgraph
of every card in D(G), and correct by observing that each 2-card has thus
been counted twice.

Definition 3.2.2 Let {u, v} and {x, y} be two couples of vertices in V (G).
These two couples are 2-card-equivalent if they generate the same 2-card, that
is, G − u − v ∼
              = G − x − y. The couples {u, v} and {x, y} are pseudo-similar
if they are 2-card-equivalent, but none of u, v is similar (i.e., a-equivalent) to
any of x, y.

                                       26
Observe that, by deﬁnition, if {u, v} and {x, y} are pseudo-similar, then the
vertices u, v, x, y must be pairwise distinct.
   The creation of the 2-deck of G raises the following natural question: is
it possible to mark each 2-card G − u − v of G with the cards of the vertices
u and v? The question is not ambiguous, since the correspondence between
the multiset of 2-cards and pairs of vertices {u, v} in G is a bijection. It
may happen, though, that a given pair of (not necessarily distinct) 1-cards
will mark several distinct 2-cards, and diﬀerent instances of the same 2-card
will be marked by diﬀerent pairs of 1-cards. As we shall see in Chapter 4,
answering the above question is very diﬃcult, almost as hard as proving the
Reconstruction Conjecture itself.




                                     27
Chapter 4

Relative degree-sequences

4.1      A few combinatorial observations
Recall from Chapter 1 that the degree-sequence of graph G is the sequence
of degrees of its vertices in a non-decreasing order. Let Q be a subgraph of
G. The degree of a vertex v ∈ V (Q) relative to G is a pair (r, d), where d
(r) is the degree of v in G (respectively, Q). We shall use the notation rd for
the pair (r, d), and say that v has relative degree r out of d.

Definition 4.1.1 The relative degree-sequence of subgraph Q (with respect
to G) is the sequence of relative degrees rd of its vertices in an order that
is non-decreasing regarding the superscripts d and also non-decreasing in r
among those degrees that have the same superscript d.

The degree-sequence of G and the relative degree-sequence of Q with respect
to G will be denoted by ds(G) and rdsG (Q), respectively. In order to ensure
that ds(G) and rdsG (Q) have the same length, we shall include a relative
“degree” ∅d in rdsG (Q) for each vertex v ∈ V (G) \ V (Q) with degree d. The
“number” ∅ is treated as 0, but the notation ∅ will distinguish between a
vertex that has been deleted and one that is still present but isolated. This
distinction is purely technical, however, because one can easily ﬁll in the ∅d
relative degrees in rdsG (Q) once ds(G) is known.


                                      28
                                      .
                                      v1
                                                               .
                                                               v1


                           G:   .
                                v2
                                           .
                                           v3
                                                     Q:   .
                                                          v2
                                                                    .
                                                                    v3

                                      .
                                      v4
                                                               .
                                                               v4



                     Figure 4.1: Graph G and its subgraph Q.

Example 4.1.2 Consider the graph G and its subgraph Q in Fig. 4.1. The
degree-sequence of G is 2, 2, 3, 3, while the relative degree sequence of Q with
respect to G is 12 , 12 , 13 , 33 .

The following simple combinatorial observation is equivalent to Nash-
Williams’ result [23, Corollary 3.5] on degree-sequence sequences, also dealt
with in Chapter 1.

Proposition 4.1.3 For every vertex v ∈ V (G), rdsG (G − v) is recoverable
from D(G).

Proof. We have seen in Chapter 1 that d(v) and ds(G) are recoverable from
D(G). Write the sequence ds(G − v) underneath ds(G) by inserting the
“degree” ∅ in ds(G − v) right under the position of the ﬁrst occurrence of
d(v) in ds(G). For example:

                     ds(G) :        2 2 2 3 3 4 4
                     ds(G − v)) :   1 1 2 2 3 ∅ 3
                     rdsG (G − v) : 12 12 22 23 33 ∅4 34

Observe that the “true” degrees in ds(G − v) will lag behind those in ds(G),
so that the diﬀerence between two degrees in aligned positions is at most 1.
Therefore it is trivial to ﬁll out the missing superscripts in ds(G − v), so that
the resulting sequence becomes rdsG (G − v).         
    Proposition 4.1.3 basically says that, for every card G − v, the degrees
of the vertices adjacent to v in G are uniquely determined by ds(G) and

                                                29
ds(G−v). Indeed, these are exactly the degrees r+1 appearing in rdsG (G−v)
as rr+1 . Of course, we still have no information about the actual position of
v’s neighbors in G − v.
   We immediately generalize Proposition 4.1.3 to ﬁnd out the relative
degree-sequence of all 2-vertex-deleted subgraphs of G. Notice that, for two
distinct vertices u, v ∈ V (G), the subgraph G − u − v is no longer determined
by the cards G − u and G − v in a unique way, since the cards themselves do
not uniquely identify the vertices u, v. Moreover, the subgraph G − u − v,
too, can be isomorphic to other subgraphs G − u′ − v ′ in which u′ and v ′ are
associated with some diﬀerent cards.

Theorem 4.1.4 Let u and v be two distinct vertices of G. Given the degree-
sequence of the subgraph G−u−v, rdsG (G−u−v) is uniquely determined by
the data ds(G), ds(G − u), and ds(G − v). Moreover, the question whether u
and v are adjacent in G or not turns out from the data ds(G), ds(G − u − v),
d(u) and d(v).

Proof. We use the same alignment argument as in the proof of Proposi-
tion 4.1.3. Write the degree-sequences ds(G), ds(G−u), and ds(G−v) under
each other, inserting the ∅ symbol in the appropriate positions of ds(G − u)
and ds(G − v). Furthermore, insert two ∅’s in ds(G − u − v) aligned with the
ones already inserted in ds(G − u) and ds(G − v). If d(u) = d(v) = d, then
insert two consecutive ∅’s aligned with the beginning of the block marked by
degree d in ds(G). For example:

    ds(G) :               2   2   2    3 3      4   4   ... ... ...   ...
    ds(G − u) :           1   1   2    2 3      4   4   ... ∅ ...     ...
    ds(G − v) :           1   2   2    2 2      3   4   ... ... ∅     ...
    ds(G − u − v) :       0   1   1    2 2      3   4   ... ∅ ∅       ...
                                  →    ←
    rdsG (G − u − v) : 02 12      22   13 23    34 44 . . .   ∅   ∅   ...

Let nG (d) (nG,Q (rd )) denote the number of occurrences of d (rd ) in ds(G)
(respectively, rdsG (Q)). Assume, for simplicity, that the smallest degree in

                                       30
G is d0 ≥ 2. Then, clearly:
                         nG,Q ((d0 − 2)d0 ) = nQ (d0 − 2).
It follows that:
   nG,Q ((d0 − 1)d0 ) = nG−u (d0 − 1) + nG−v (d0 − 1) − 2 · nQ (d0 − 2), and

          nG,Q (dd00 ) = nG (d0 ) − nG,Q ((d0 − 2)d0 ) − nG,Q ((d0 − 1)d0 ),
provided that neither of the degrees d(u) and d(v) equals d0 . If either or both
does, then the above calculation changes in a straightforward way regarding
the numbers nG,Q ((d0 − 1)d0 ) and nG,Q (dd00 ). Observe that some adjacent
degrees d−1 and d (d ≥ 1) in ds(G−u−v), showing up as relative degrees (d−
1)d+1 and dd in rdsG (G − u − v), must be interchanged in the latter sequence,
since the ascending order with respect to the superscripts has priority over
that of the actual subgraph degrees. See the example above regarding the
relative degrees 13 and 22 .
    One can then carry on in the same way, calculating the numbers
nG,Q ((d0 − 1)d0 +1 ), nG,Q (dd00 +1 ), nG,Q ((d0 + 1)d0 +1 ), and so on. Details are
left to the reader.
   As to the second statement of the theorem, if
                    |E(G)| − |E(G − u − v)| = d(u) + d(v),
then u and v are not connected in G, otherwise they are. The numbers |E(G)|
and |E(G − u − v)| are determined by ds(G) and ds(G − u − v), respectively.
The proof is complete.     

4.2      The relative degree-sequence conjecture
Proposition 4.1.3 and Theorem 4.1.4 show that the concept of relative degree-
sequence is rather fundamental in the study of graph reconstruction. To pro-
vide yet another evidence of this observation, let Rds(G) denote the multiset
                   {rdsG (Q)|Q is an induced subgraph of G}.

                                         31
Thus, relative degree-sequences of subgraphs count with multiplicity in
Rds(G). We put forward the following conjecture, which is very closely
related to the Reconstruction Conjecture.

Conjecture 4.2.1 For every graph G, Rds(G) identifies G up to isomor-
phism.

Conjecture 4.2.1 is especially interesting for several reasons.

   1. It appears to hold for all graphs with no exceptions.

   2. It provides a characterization of graph isomorphism, which has been
       sought for a very long time.

   3. Algebraically, if G = G1 +G2 , where + denotes disjoint union of graphs,
       then
                                 Rds(G) = Rds(G1 ) × Rds(G2 ).                           (4.2.1)

In equation 4.2.1 above, × stands for concatenation of sets of relative degree-
sequences in the formal language sense (taking the quotient of the product
by commutativity). In terms of polynomials, one can think of a relative
degree rd as a formal variable. Let X denote the set of all such variables.
Then Rds(G) becomes a polynomial PG of the variables X over the integer
ring Z, in which all coeﬃcients are non-negative. Indeed, the coeﬃcient of
a term xp11 . . . xpkk in PG is the number of times the relative degree-sequence
xp11 . . . xpkk , that is, the sequence:

                       (x1 , . . . , x1 , x2 , . . . , x2 , . . . , xk , . . . , xk ),

comes up in Rds(G). The polynomial PG itself is simply the sum of these
terms for all relative degree-sequences. Notice that the empty graph trans-
lates into the polynomial 1, that is, the empty sequence (product) of vari-
ables, and not to 0. The polynomial 0 is not the image of any graph at
all.

                                                    32
   Let Z[X] denote the commutative Z-module (in fact algebra) of X-
polynomials over Z. (Mind that addition of polynomials is commutative
in Z[X].) Our fundamental observation is that the operation × in equa-
tion 4.2.1 translates naturally into product of polynomials in the algebra
Z[X]. This product makes the algebra Z[X] associative and commutative,
therefore a commutative ring. In this way we could establish an embedding
of the additive commutative monoid structure of graphs with disjoint union
into the multiplicative structure of the commutative ring Z[X], which would
be a very strong result, indeed.
   Conjecture 4.2.1 was the starting point of the present study, and the
observation in the previous paragraph served as a motivation for it. Even
more generally, our ambitious goal is to ﬁnd an embedding of the free traced
monoidal category [12] of ﬂowchart schemes, which is practically a graph
structure with the tensor operation being disjoint union of graphs, into the
compact closed category of free modules over the commutative ring Z[X], in
which tensor and trace are the standard matrix operations. Conjecture 4.2.1
is the key to this very general result. We do not wish to elaborate on al-
gebraic and category theoretic issues in the present study, however, and the
arguments above are included for the sake of revealing the real motives in
formulating Conjecture 4.2.1 only. As it turned out very soon, the key to
Conjecture 4.2.1 is in fact the Reconstruction Conjecture, therefore the focus
of research has changed from algebra to combinatorics.
  Naturally enough, Conjecture 4.2.1 also has an “edge” version, in which
Rds(G) is deﬁned as the set of relative degree-sequences of all subgraphs of
G. This version, too, appears to hold for all graphs G with no exceptions.
   The connection between Conjecture 4.2.1 and the Reconstruction Con-
jecture is the following. If one could compute Rds(G) from D(G), then
Conjecture 4.2.1 would imply the Reconstruction Conjecture. As our sec-
ond main result in Chapter 5 shows, however, computing the whole multiset
Rds(G) appears to be far too much work in order to reconstruct G. Therefore


                                     33
this reconstruction argument probably does not hold much water, indicating
that Conjecture 4.2.1 is even tougher than the Reconstruction Conjecture.
   On the other hand, if, given Rds(G), one could isolate Rds(G−v) for each
vertex-deleted subgraph of G, then the Reconstruction Conjecture would im-
ply Conjecture 4.2.1 through a straightforward induction argument. Since
our concern is eventually Conjecture 4.2.1, and the construction of the mul-
tiset of multisets
                         {Rds(G − v)|v ∈ V (G)}

from Rds(G) looks promising, we shall try to prove the Reconstruction Con-
jecture ﬁrst.




                                    34
Chapter 5

The reconstruction of
card-minimal graphs

In this chapter we present our second main result, which aims at the recon-
struction of card-minimal graphs not containing pseudo-similar couples of
vertices.


5.1         The role of pseudo-similar couples of ver-
            tices in card-minimal graphs
Recall from Chapter 2 that graph G is card-minimal if D(G) is a set of |V (G)|
diﬀerent cards. According to Deﬁnition 3.2.2, two couples of vertices {u, v}
and {x, y} in a card-minimal graph G are pseudo-similar iﬀ:

                           G−u−v ∼
                                 = G − x − y,

and u, x, y, z are pairwise distinct. Indeed, given the fact that there are
no distinct a-equivalent vertices in a card-minimal graph (not even pseudo-
similar ones), the condition that neither of u, v is a-equivalent to any of x, y
is equivalent to the condition that these vertices are pairwise distinct.
   To shed some light on the intuition behind pseudo-similarity between
couples of vertices in a card-minimal graph G, let Q be an arbitrary graph

                                      35
       u                      x
           v                      y
                         a)                                 b)


 Figure 5.1: Graphs with and without pseudo-similar couples of vertices.

having |V (G)| − 2 vertices. Consider the set C of cards in D(G) in which Q
is isomorphic to at least one vertex-deleted subgraph. Construct the graph
GQ which has C as its set of vertices, and any two cards G − u, G − v are
connected in GQ iﬀ G − u − v ∼   = Q. (Remember that G is card-minimal,
therefore the deﬁnition of GQ is correct.) Then G is free from pseudo-similar
couples of vertices iﬀ GQ is either a triangle or a star graph for every 2-card
Q of G. In other words, either |C| = 2 and GQ is a single edge, or |C| > 2
and the following two conditions are met:

  1. the subgraph Q occurs k ≥ 2 times as a vertex-deleted subgraph in
     some card G − u ∈ C;

  2. |C| = k + 1 and the cards in C diﬀerent from G − u all have a single
     occurrence of Q in them, with the possible exception that k = 2 and
     all the three cards in C have two occurrences of Q in them.

See Fig. 5.1a for a card-minimal graph G which does, and Fig. 5.1b for
one which does not contain pseudo-similar couples of vertices. The smallest
card-minimal graph of Fig. 2.2 does have a pair of pseudo-similar couples, as
shown by Fig. 5.2
   It is clear by the above characterization that the property of not having
pseudo-similar couples of vertices is recognizable for card-minimal graphs,

                                      36
                           v                     y




                           u      x

         Figure 5.2: The smallest card-minimal graph, revisited.

i.e., the property is decidable by looking at the deck only. (Of course, the
property of being card-minimal is immediately recognizable.) Indeed, for
each 2-card Q of G, one must construct the graph GQ and check if it is a
triangle or a star graph. If so, then G is free from pseudo-similar couples of
vertices, otherwise it is not. Remember from Chapter 3 that the 2-deck of G
is constructible from D(G).


5.2     The reconstruction result
In this section we present our second main result on the reconstruction of
card-minimal graphs not containing pseudo-similar couples of vertices.

Theorem 5.2.1 Every card-minimal graph G free from pseudo-similar cou-
ples of vertices is reconstructible.

Proof. Let Q be an arbitrary 2-card of G, and ﬁnd the set C of cards in
which Q is isomorphic to at least one vertex-deleted subgraph. Clearly, C
has at least two elements. If there are exactly two cards G − u and G − v in
C, then conclude that Q ∼= G − u − v, and use Theorem 4.1.4 to decide if u
and v are adjacent in G or not. If C has more than two elements, then two
cases are possible.
Case A: |C| = 3, and each card in C has two subgraphs isomorphic to Q.
Case B: there is exactly one card G − u ∈ C that contains more than one
subgraph isomorphic to Q.

                                      37
   In case A, Q ∼= G − u − v for any pair G − u, G − v of distinct cards in
C, while in case B, Q ∼
                      = G − u − v for all vertices v 6= u such that G − v ∈ C.
Furthermore, in case B, Q is not isomorphic to any other 2-card of G. (In
other words, Q 6∼
                = G − u1 − u2 , where G − u1 and G − u2 are both in C but
ui 6= u for either i = 1 or 2.) In both cases, use Theorem 4.1.4 to ﬁnd out if
u is adjacent to v in G, knowing that Q ∼  = G − u − v. It is evident that the
above procedure will decide for each pair of cards G − u, G − v in D(G) if the
vertices u and v are adjacent in G or not. Graph G is thus reconstructed,
and the proof is complete.    




                                     38
Chapter 6

Conclusion

Motivated by an independent study in algebra and category theory, we have
presented a structural analysis of graphs with the aim of being able to recon-
struct them from some partial information. The basis of the reconstruction
of graph G could either be the classical multiset of G’s vertex-deleted sub-
graphs, or the multiset of relative degree-sequences of all induced subgraphs
of G.
  In order to better understand the problem of graph reconstruction, in
Chapter 3 we have considered two basic equivalence relations on the set
of vertices of a graph G: card equivalence and automorphism equivalence.
Card equivalence is the one that is directly related to the Reconstruction
Conjecture. Our examples have shown, however, that this equivalence is
sometimes rather inconvenient to deal with. Automorphism equivalence has
a much more transparent structure, and it has turned out to be very closely
related to card equivalence. To demonstrate this fact, we have worked out
a characterization theorem for card equivalence, which shows how to bring
card equivalence in line with automorphism equivalence.
   With respect to relative degree sequences, in Chapter 4 we have pro-
vided a generalization of an earlier observation by Nash-Williams on the
degree-sequence sequence of graphs. Recognizing the importance of relative
degree-sequences in graph reconstruction, we have proposed a new conjec-


                                     39
ture saying that every graph G is uniquely determined (up to isomorphism)
by the multiset of relative degree-sequences of its induced subgraphs. This
conjecture directly connects the motivating algebraic study to the problem
of graph reconstruction, showing that the new conjecture is probably even
more diﬃcult to prove than the Reconstruction Conjecture.
   In Chapter 5 we have investigated the class of card-minimal graphs, the
deck of which is a set. We have also generalized the concept of peudo-
similarity to couples of vertices in any graph G. As a result we have shown
that every card-minimal graph G not having pseudo-similar couples of ver-
tices is reconstructible.




                                    40
Bibliography

[1] Bartha, M. and Shuva, A. S., Reconstructing graphs from a deck of all
   distinct cards, Studia Univ. Babes-Bolyai Mathematica 59, Number 4,
   2014, 443–455.

[2] Bauderon, M. and Courcelle, B., Graph expressions and graph rewritings,
    Math. Systems. Theory 20 (1987), 83–127.

[3] Bollobás, B., Almost every graph has reconstruction number three, J.
    Graph Theory 14 (1990), 1–4.

[4] Bondy, J. A., A Graph Reconstructor’s Manual, in: Surveys in Combi-
    natorics, 1991, London Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series No.
   166, Cambridge University Press, 1991, pp. 221-252.

[5] Engelfriet, J. and Vereijken, J. J., Context-free graph grammars and con-
   catenation of graphs, Acta Informatica 34 (1997), 773–803.

[6] Godsil, C. D. and Kocay, W. L., Graphs with three mutually pseudo-
   similar vertice, J. Combin. Theory Ser. B 35 (1983) 240–246.

[7] Godsil, C. D. and Kocay, W. L., Constructing graphs with pairs of
   pseudo-similar vertices, J. Combin. Theory Ser. B 32 (1982), 146–155.

[8] Harary, F., On the reconstruction of a graph from a collection of sub-
   graphs, In: Theory of Graphs and its Applications (Proc. Sympos.



                                    41
    Smolenice, 1963). Publ. House Czechoslovak Acad. Sci., Prague, 1964,
    pp. 47–52.

 [9] Harary, F. The four color conjecture and other graphical diseases, Proof
     Techniques in Graph Theory, Proc. Second Ann Arbor Graph Theory
    Conference, Ann Arbor, Mich., 1968), ed. F. Harary. Academic Press,
    New York, 1969, pp. 1-9.

[10] Harary, F., A survey of the reconstruction conjecture, Lecture Notes in
    Mathematics 406 (1974), 18–28.

[11] Harary, F. and Palmer, E. M., On similar points of a graph, J. Math.
     Mech. 15 (1966), 623–630.

[12] Joyal, A., Street, R. and Verity, D., Traced monoidal categories, Math.
    Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc., 119 (1996), 447–468.

[13] Kelly, P. J., On Isometric Transformations, Ph.D. thesis, University of
     Wisconsin, 1942.

[14] Kelly, P. J., A congruence theorem for trees, Paciﬁc J. Math. 7 (1957),
    961–968.

[15] Kimble, R. J., Existence of graphs where almost every edge is pseudo-
    similar, Proc. 4th International Conf., Theory and Applications of
    Graphs, Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, G. Chartrand et al.
    eds., Wiley (1981), pp. 431-436.

[16] Kimble, R. J., Schwenk, A. J. and Stockmeyer, P. K., Pseudosimilar ver-
     tices in a graph, J. Graph Theory 5 (1981), 171–181.

[17] Kocay, W. L., A small graph with three mutually pseudo-similar vertices,
    Ars Combinatorica 14 (1982), 99–103.

[18] Kocay. W. L., Graphs, groups and pseudo-similar vertices, J. Austral.
     Math. Soc., Ser. A 37 (1984), 181-189.

                                       42
[19] Krishnamoorthy, V. and Parthasarathy, K. R., Cospectral graphs and
     digraphs with given automorphism group, J. Combin. Theory Ser. B 19
    (1975), 204–213.

[20] Lauri, J., Pseudosimilarity in graphs – a survey, Ars Combinatorica 46
    (1997), 77–95.

[21] Lauri, J. and Marino, M. C., On pseudosimilarity in graphs, Combina-
    torics ’88, Proc. International Conf. on Incidence Geometries and Com-
    binatorial Structures, Ravello, Italy, 1988, ed. A. Barlotti et al. Vol. 2
    (1991), pp. 169–179.

[22] Lauri, J. Endvertex-deleted subgraphs, Ars Combinatoria 36 (1993), 171-
     182.

[23] Nash-Williams, C. St. J. A., The Reconstruction Problem, in: L. Beineke,
     R. J. Wilson, eds., Selected topics in graph theory, Academic Press,
    1978, pp. 205–236.

[24] Ramachandran, S., On a new digraph reconstruction conjecture, J. Com-
    bin. Theory Ser. B 31 (1981), 143–149,

[25] Ramachandran, S., Graph Reconstruction–Some New Developments,
    AKCE J. Graphs. Combin. 1 (2004), 51–61.

[26] Stockmeyer, P. K., The falsity of the reconstruction conjecture for tour-
    naments, J. Graph Theory 1 (1977), 19–25.

[27] Ulam, S. M., A Collection of Mathematical Problems, Wiley (Inter-
    science) New York, 1960, Second edition: Problems in Modem Mathe-
    matics, 1964.




                                     43
